NTFSCK(8)                   System Manager's Manual                  NTFSCK(8)



NAME
       ntfsck - check and repair an NTFS file system

SYNOPSIS
       ntfsck [options] device

DESCRIPTION
       ntfsck will check and repair an NTFS file system located on device or
       an NTFS image file.

OPTIONS
       Below is a summary of all the options that ntfsck accepts. Nearly all
       options have two equivalent names. The short name is preceded by - and
       the long name is preceded by --.  Any single letter options, that don't
       take an argument, can be combined into a single command, e.g.  -fv is
       equivalent to -f -v.  Long named options can be abbreviated to any
       unique prefix of their name.

       -a, --automatic-repair
              Repair the volume if it appears to be in need of a repair. This
              options makes ntfsck exit immediately if the volume appears to
              be in order (no dirty flag set, logfile clean, no hibernated
              Windows session, ...), but otherwise a full repair is performed.
              Note that volume is considered dirty if either one or more of
              follwing is true a) dirty flag set b) logfile clean c)
              hibernated windows volume.

       -c, --fast-check
              Check if volume is dirty then exit. If the volume is dirty then
              the exit value will be 100. If used with -m/--mount-check-only
              then also repairs any issues which prevent volume from being
              mounted. Read the definition of dirty volume from
              -a/--automatic-repair option.

       -m, --mount-check-only
              Check if volume can be mounted safely and if volume can be
              mounted then exit. If volume cannot be mounted then fix it and
              exit. Also works if used with -c/--fast-check.

       -s, --simulate
              Simulate repair of the volume. This option caches all the
              changes made by ntfsck in memory and never writes to the device.
              This can be done with a write-protected volume to check what
              changes ntfsck would make if it would be able to write to it.
              Exit value will be the same as you'd expect during a normal
              repair.

       -P, --no-progress-bar
              Don't show progress bars.

       -C, --no-alloc-check
              Don't check cluster allocations. This option speeds up ntfsck.
              Use this option with caution.

       -O, --no-orpan-check
              Don't check for orphaned files. This option speeds up ntfsck.

       -M, --no-mft-scan
              Don't scan $MFT.  -S, --no-sync Don't sync NTFS metadata before
              exit. This option speeds up ntfsck however it's safe to use only
              if device is not removed/ejected.

       -F, --file FILE
              Check and repair FILE only. FILE is absolute path to a file or
              directory.

       -i, --inode NUMBER
              Correct inode NUMBER only and its children.

       -t, --timeout SECONDS
              Timeout in seconds before ntfsck will abort the volume
              check/repair. If specified, this sets an upper limit on the
              execution time of ntfsck. After the timeout occurs, ntfsck will
              clear all its pending tasks and return as soon as possible.
              As a special case, a timeout value of 0 means that there is no
              timeout, i.e. it is equivalent to not specifying the timeout
              option at all.

       -f, --force
              This will override some sensible defaults. Use this option with
              caution.

       -D, --delete-crosslinked
              Delete cross linked clusters.

       -b, --crosslinked-check
              Run crosslinked check. Remember without this option we will see
              cross linked messages i.e. information regarding cross linked
              clusters will always appear in the output. It is disabled by
              default because resolving cross-links without data loss means
              moving clusters around which may take extra time if number of
              cross-linked clusters is high. If ntfsck with this option is run
              periodically then it can be switched on.

       -e, --delete-crosslinked-if-no-space
              Delete cross linked clusters in case ntfsck cannot resolve them
              by moving to empty space.

       -w, --mem NUMBER
              Set memory limit in system (in MB). This is useful for running
              ntfsck in systems with low memory, and when user already knows
              the minimum available memory which should be available. Chances
              of failure because of low memory are reduced but not entirely
              removed. This can still result in failure if required memory at
              certain stage in check increases, and system really has nothing
              available at that point in time.  Chances of that happening are
              very less though. One disadvantage of not having enough memory
              is that for large storage devices, ntfsck would take more time
              to run.

       -u, --automatic-mem
              Same as --mem but this time user doesn't mention available
              memory and instead ntfsck tries to automatically detect it. Note
              that this option also has similar limitations as mentioned in
              --mem option above description.

       -p, --playlog
              Play NTFS Journal if volume is dirty, needs a journal replay and
              $LogFile isn't corrupt. In case $LogFile is corrupt reset it or
              if we encounter specification changes or un-supported actions
              then also reset it.

       -r, --replay
              Same as --playlog but doesn't invoke fsck run after journal has
              been played.

       -B, --progress-fd
              This option is similar to '-C fd' in e2fsck. It causes fsck to
              write progress of ntfsck to specified file descriptor. If file
              descriptor is negative, then progress is suppressed and can only
              be enabled by sending SIGUSR1 signal. Once this signal arrives
              absolute value of input is used as file descriptor. SIGUSR2
              signal can be used to stop progress information being written to
              file descriptor.

       -h, --help
              Show a list of options with a brief description of each one.

       -V, --version
              Show the version number of ntfsck.

EXIT CODE
       The exit code returned by ntfsck is one of the followings:
              0      - No errors or file system was successfully repaired
              1      - File system errors could not be corrected
              23     - Volume is read-only
              100    - Volume is dirty, needs check (--fast-check was used)

BUGS
       If you find a bug please send an email describing the problem to ntfs-
       support@tuxera.com.

AVAILABILITY
       ntfsck is part of the Tuxera NTFS package.

SEE ALSO
       mkntfs(8)



Tuxera NTFS Utilities 3017.7.18.14
                                 January 2017                        NTFSCK(8)
