MKFATFS(8)                  System Manager's Manual                 MKFATFS(8)



NAME
       mkfatfs - create a FAT file system

SYNOPSIS
       mkfatfs [options] device

DESCRIPTION
       mkfatfs is used to create a FAT file system on a device (usually a disk
       or flash partition).  device is the special file corresponding to the
       device (e.g.  /dev/sdXX, /dev/block/mmcblk1p1).

OPTIONS
       Below is a summary of all the options that mkfatfs accepts.  Nearly all
       options have two equivalent names.  The short name is preceded by - and
       the long name is preceded by --.

       -a, --alignment VALUE
              Align the file system structures to VALUE bytes.
              WARNING: Don't use this in production unless explictly
              instructed by Tuxera. The default alignment is usually the
              appropriate one.

       -c, --cluster-size SIZE
              Set the cluster size (in bytes) of the volume to SIZE. The
              default is to determine optimal cluster size automatically. The
              legal values for this field are powers of 2, such that SIZE does
              not exceed 32 KiB.

       --cp CODEPAGE
              Use the given code page to encode the volume label. The
              following code pages are supported: 437, 737, 775, 850, 852,
              855, 857, 860, 861, 862, 863, 864, 865, 866, 869, 874, 932, 936,
              949, 950. The default is 437.

       -d DIRECTORY
              Populate file system with the contents of the given directory.
              Can be used in the build process to create the target device's
              file system image.

       --discard
              This option sends a 'discard' command, like TRIM, to the device
              which will zero all data on it.

       -f, --force
              Allow formatting a FAT volume for which the physical sector size
              cannot be automatically detected (for example an image file).

       -F, --fat-type FATBITS
              Set the FAT bits for the volume to FATBITS. The legal values for
              this field are [12, 16, 32].

       -i, --volume-id STRING
              Sets the volume ID for the volume to STRING, which must be in
              the format XXXX-XXXX where X is a hexadecimal character (0-9,
              A-F).

       -l, --volume-label STRING
              Set the volume label for the file system. The volume label can
              be up to 11 bytes long when encoded with code page specified by
              --cp option.

       -r, --rootdir-entries NUMBER
              Set the count of 32 bytes directory entries in the root
              directory to NUMBER.
              For FAT32 volumes this value is ignored and set to zero. For FAT
              12/16 volume the default value is 512.

       -s, --sectors-per-cluster VALUE
              Set the volume cluster size (in bytes) to VALUE * sector_size.
              The default value is calculated dynamically depending on FAT
              type (FAT 12/16/32) and the size of the volume. The legal values
              for this field are [1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, 128], such that
              VALUE * sector_size does not exceed 32 KiB.

       -S, --sector-size SIZE
              Set the volume sector size (in bytes) to SIZE. The default is to
              detect sector size automatically. Note: This option should
              probably never be used when formatting devices directly as most
              FAT drivers won't be able to use a FAT volume where the volume
              sector size doesn't match the physical sector size.

       --sda-relax
              Relaxes sanity checks for --sda-strict and --sda-whole to allow
              formatting devices that don't comply to the size specifications
              of SD cards to be formatted according to the SD Association
              guidelines.

              NOTE: This option is only a modifier to --sda-strict and
              --sda-whole and does not do anything on its own.

       --sda-strict
              Forces the formatted volume to adhere to SD Association
              recommendations.

       --sda-whole
              Performs a whole device formatting, including partition table,
              according to the SD Association recommendations. This option
              should only be used with whole devices (e.g. /dev/mmcblk0) and
              never partitions (e.g.  /dev/mmcblk0p1).

       --secure-discard
              This option sends a 'secure discard' command, e.g. eMMC's secure
              erase, to the device which will zero all data on it. The
              difference from the --discard option is that this command
              attempts to securely erase the data, guaranteeing that all
              internal copies of the discarded sectors are also erased. If the
              underlying hardware does not support this mode of operation, we
              fall back on a regular discard. This option is only available on
              systems where this is supported.

       -t, --tar-archive TARFILE
              Populate the formatted file system with the contents of the
              specified tar archive TARFILE.
              It is recommended to use the POSIX.1-2001/pax format when
              creating the tar archive in order to retain as much metadata as
              possible from the source files.

       -v, --verbose
              Makes mkfatfs emit certain status messages related to the
              formatting process.

BUGS
       If you find a bug please send an email describing the problem to
       support@tuxera.com.

AUTHORS
       mkfatfs was written by
               Erik Larsson, Tuxera Inc.
               Sougata Santra, Tuxera Inc.

AVAILABILITY
       mkfatfs is part of the Tuxera FATprogs package.



Tuxera TFATprogs 3023.2.3.12       June 2021                        MKFATFS(8)
