FATDUMP(8)                  System Manager's Manual                 FATDUMP(8)



NAME
       fatdump - Efficiently dump the contents of a FAT volume.

SYNOPSIS
       fatdump [options] device|image

DESCRIPTION
       fatdump will efficiently extract all relevant metadata and (optionally)
       data from an FAT volume and dump it to standard output.  It works at
       disk sector level and copies only the used data. Unused disk space
       becomes zero.

       fatdump can be useful to make backups, an exact snapshot of a FAT
       filesystem to restore later on, or for developers to
       troubleshoot/investigate users' issues using the clone without the risk
       of destroying the original filesystem.

OPTIONS
       Below is a summary of all the options that fatdump accepts.  Nearly all
       options have two equivalent names.  The short name is preceded by - and
       the long name is preceded by -- .

       -d, --dirmetadata
              Clone ONLY METADATA (for FAT experts). This command is similar
              to the -m/--metadata option but uses an exclusive rather than
              inclusive algorithm, which may reduce image size on corrupted
              volumes with a lot of unreachable data, but will then omit data
              that could possibly be useful for debugging.

       -m, --metadata
              Clone ONLY METADATA (for FAT experts). A metadata dump contains
              all of the FAT volume structures but none of the user data, i.e.
              all file content will be omitted but the directory structure
              will be preserved. The output from this command will be
              relatively small if compressed.

       -n, --ntfsclone-image
              Emit an ntfsclone packed image (special image format) as output.
              This saves space since all the non-allocated regions (and in the
              case of '-m' /'--metadata' all the non-metadata regions) will
              not be written out explicitly, but instead marked as a 'hole' in
              the image.

       -q, --quiet
              Suppress non-error output on stderr.

       -f, --force
              Force a clone, ignoring errors from cluster accounting.

EXIT CODES
       The exit code is 0 on success, non-zero otherwise.

EXAMPLES
       Dump FAT file system on /dev/sda1 to a compressed metadata image:

              fatdump /dev/sda1 | bzip2 > sda1.img.bz2

       Dump FAT file system metadata on /dev/sda1 to a compressed metadata
       image:

              fatdump -m /dev/sda1 | bzip2 > sda1.img.bz2

       Dump a FAT volume to a remote host, using ssh. Please note that ssh may
       ask for a password!

              fatdump /dev/sda1 | bzip2 | ssh host 'cat > sda1.img.bzip2'


PLEASE NOTE
       fatdump currently does not support FAT12 volumes.

KNOWN ISSUES
       There are no known problems with fatdump.  If you think you have found
       a problem then please send an email describing it to fat-
       support@tuxera.com.

AUTHORS
       fatdump was written by
               Erik Larsson, Tuxera Inc.
               Sougata Santra, Tuxera Inc.

AVAILABILITY
       fatdump is part of the Tuxera FAT package.

SEE ALSO
       fatdebug(8)



Tuxera TFATprogs 3017.7.17.3       June 2013                        FATDUMP(8)
