NTFSCK(8)                                                            NTFSCK(8)



NAME
       ntfsck - check and repair an NTFS file system

SYNOPSIS
       ntfsck [options] device

DESCRIPTION
       ntfsck  will  check and repair an NTFS file system located on device or
       an NTFS image file.

OPTIONS
       Below is a summary of all the options that ntfsck accepts.  Nearly  all
       options  have two equivalent names. The short name is preceded by - and
       the long name is preceded by --.  Any single letter options, that don't
       take  an  argument, can be combined into a single command, e.g.  -fv is
       equivalent to -f -v.  Long named options  can  be  abbreviated  to  any
       unique prefix of their name.

       -a, --automatic-repair
              Repair  the volume if it appears to be in need of a repair. This
              options makes ntfsck exit immediately if the volume  appears  to
              be  in  order  (no  dirty flag set, logfile clean, no hibernated
              Windows session, ...), but otherwise a full repair is performed.

       -c, --fast-check
              Check if volume is dirty then exit. If the volume is dirty  then
              the  exit  value will be 100. If used with -m/--mount-check-only
              then also repairs any issues which  prevent  volume  from  being
              mounted.

       -m, --mount-check-only
              Check  if  volume  can  be  mounted  safely and if volume can be
              mounted then exit. If volume cannot be mounted then fix  it  and
              exit. Also works if used with -c/--fast-check.

       -s, --simulate
              Simulate  repair  of  the  volume.  This  option  caches all the
              changes made by ntfsck in memory and never writes to the device.
              This  can  be  done  with a write-protected volume to check what
              changes ntfsck would make if it would be able to  write  to  it.
              Exit  value  will  be  the  same as you'd expect during a normal
              repair.

       -P, --no-progress-bar
              Don't show progress bars.

       -C, --no-alloc-check
              Don't check cluster allocations. This option speeds  up  ntfsck.
              Use this option with caution.

       -O, --no-orpan-check
              Don't check for orphaned files. This option speeds up ntfsck.

       -M, --no-mft-scan
              Don't scan $MFT. This option typically slows down ntfsck.

       -S, --no-sync
              Don't sync NTFS metadata before exit. This option speeds up ntf‐
              sck  however  it's  safe  to  use  only   if   device   is   not
              removed/ejected.

       -F, --file FILE
              Check  and  repair FILE only. FILE is absolute path to a file or
              directory.

       -i, --inode NUMBER
              Correct inode NUMBER only and its children.

       -t, --timeout SECONDS
              Timeout  in  seconds  before  ntfsck  will  abort   the   volume
              check/repair. If specified, this sets an upper limit on the exe‐
              cution time of ntfsck. After the  timeout  occurs,  ntfsck  will
              clear all its pending tasks and return as soon as possible.

       -f, --force
              This  will override some sensible defaults. Use this option with
              caution.

       -D, --delete-crosslinked
              Delete cross linked clusters.

       -b, --crosslinked-check
              Run crosslinked check. Remember without this option we will  see
              cross  linked  messages  i.e. information regarding cross linked
              clusters will always appear in the output.  It  is  disabled  by
              default  because  resolving  cross-links without data loss means
              moving clusters around which may take extra time  if  number  of
              cross-linked clusters is high. If ntfsck with this option is run
              periodically then it can be switched on.

       -e, --delete-crosslinked-if-no-space
              Delete cross linked clusters in case ntfsck cannot resolve  them
              by moving to empty space.

       -n, ---check-duplicate-names
              Enable duplicate name detection check.

       -h, --help
              Show a list of options with a brief description of each one.

       -V, --version
              Show the version number of ntfsck.

EXIT CODE
       The exit code returned by ntfsck is one of the followings:
              0      - No errors or file system was successfully repaired
              1      - File system errors could not be corrected
              23     - Volume is read-only
              100    - Volume is dirty, needs check (--fast-check was used)

BUGS
       If  you find a bug please send an email describing the problem to ntfs-
       support@tuxera.com.

AVAILABILITY
       ntfsck is part of the Tuxera NTFS package.

SEE ALSO
       mkntfs(8)



Tuxera NTFS Utilities 3015.11.10 October 2012                        NTFSCK(8)
